PEP 718: Specify binding, parametrisation and overload interactions (#4649)
python/peps: peps/pep-0718.rst

Reviewer: But if you'd write `foo[int](b"hello")` it would also type check, right? So this is inherently unsound.

Reviewer 2: Right, this isn't a good motivational example. The `bytes | Sequence[int]` and `str | Sequence[str]` ambiguities need solutions elsewhere (and I don't know how I'd do it).

Reviewer 3: Not sure why, though, what I care in this example is being able to control the exit type, sometimes is not possible because the argument matches type in two different ways, but this gives back control to the exit type.

but if it adds confusion, let's remove the example.

Reviewer 3: i remove it from my pr, let me know if after reading this we want to recover it.

Reviewer 2: I'd show the revealed type here in a comment.

Reviewer 3: ok

gives developers explicit control over the types produced by the type checker where
bi-directional inference (which allows for the types of parameters of anonymous
functions to be inferred) and other methods than specialisation are insufficient. It
also makes functions consistent with regular classes in their ability to be
subscripted.

Motivation
----------

> Currently, classes allow passing type annotations for generic containers, this

Reviewer: Comma splice
```suggestion
Currently, classes allow passing type annotations for generic containers. This
```

is especially useful in common constructors such as ``list``\, ``tuple`` and ``dict``
etc.

.. code-block:: python

   my_integer_list = list[int]()
   reveal_type(my_integer_list)  # type is list[int]

At runtime ``list[int]`` returns a ``GenericAlias`` that can be later called, returning
an empty list.

Another example of this is creating a specialised ``dict`` type for a section of our
code where we want to ensure that keys are ``str`` and values are ``int``:

.. code-block:: python

>    NameNumberDict = dict[str, int]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   NameNumberDict: dict[str, int]
```

Reviewer: Oh sorry this is not what you meant. I think this example would be clearer as something like `name_number_dict = dict[str, int](one=1, ...)`

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine to keep this example exactly as it is.

   NameNumberDict(
      one=1,
      two=2,
      three="3"  # Invalid: Literal["3"] is not of type int
   )

In spite of the utility of this syntax, when trying to use it with a function, an error
is raised, as functions are not subscriptable.

.. code-block:: python

>    def my_list[T](arr) -> list[T]:

Reviewer 2: Should this be augmented with `arr: Iterable[T]` (which reflects what `list(arr)` expects) or is that a distraction?

Reviewer 3: no strong opinion, but for me Iterable distracts a bit from the point

Reviewer 3: changing

      # do something...
      return list(arr)

   my_integer_list = my_list[int]()  # TypeError: 'function' object is not subscriptable

> There are a few workarounds:

Reviewer 2: I think both examples would benefit from an example call of the resulting `make_list()` too. This seems esp. important for (2), which would reveal the clumsiness of that solution for callers.

Reviewer 3: good point

1. Making a callable class:

.. code-block:: python

   class my_list[T]:

>         def __call__(self, *args: T) -> list[T]:

Reviewer 2: Oh, this signature is inconsistent with `make_list(arr)` above.

Reviewer 3: fixed

            # do something...
            return list(args)

2. Using :pep:`747`\'s TypeForm, with an extra unused argument:

.. code-block:: python

   from typing import TypeForm

   def my_list(*args: T, typ: TypeForm[T]) -> list[T]:
      # do something...
      return list(args)

As we can see this solution increases the complexity with an extra argument.
Additionally it requires the user to understand a new concept ``TypeForm``.

3. Annotating the assignment:

.. code-block:: python

   my_integer_list: list[int] = my_list()

This solution isn't optimal as the return type is repeated and is more verbose and

> would require the type updating in multiple places if the return type changes.

Reviewer 2: Additionally, it's verbose when the intention is to pass the specialized value into another call -- now the reader has to deal with the distraction of seeing a temporary variable declaration.

Reviewer 3: added

Interactions with ``@typing.overload``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This PEP opens the door to overloading based on type variables:

Reviewer 2: Given the complexity and ambiguity already present in `@overload` I'm not sure that "opens the door" is enough of a specification.

Reviewer 3: changing to "this pep allows"

.. code-block:: python

   @overload
   def serializer_for[T: str]() -> StringSerializer: ...
   @overload
   def serializer_for[T: list]() -> ListSerializer: ...

   def serializer_for():
       ...

For overload resolution a new step will be required previous to any other, where the resolver
will match only the overloads where the subscription may succeed.

.. code-block:: python

   @overload
   def make[*Ts]() -> float: ...
   @overload
   def make[T]() -> int: ...

   make[int]  # matches first and second overload
   make[int, str]  # matches only first

Functions Parameterized by ``TypeVarTuple``\ s
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Currently, type checkers disallow the use of multiple ``TypeVarTuple``\s in their
generic parameters; however, it is currently valid to have a function as such:

.. code-block:: python

   def foo[*T, *U](bar: Bar[*T], baz: Baz[*U]): ...
   def spam[*T](bar: Bar[*T]): ...

This PEP does not allow functions like ``foo`` to be subscripted, for the same reason

> as defined in :pep:`PEP 646<646#multiple-type-variable-tuples-not-allowed>`.

Reviewer 2: That reason is so simple to explain that I'd just repeat it here. Also make it explicit that `spam` *is* acceptable here (rather than waiting to show it in the example below).

Reviewer 3: done

.. code-block:: python

   foo[int, str, bool, complex](Bar(), Baz())  # Invalid: cannot determine which parameters are passed to *T and *U. Explicitly parameterise the instances individually
   spam[int, str, bool, complex](Bar())        # OK

Binding Rules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Method subscription (including ``classmethods``, ``staticmethods``, etc.) should only

Reviewer 2: What is covered by the casual "etc." here? In a spec it need to specified, not left as a guess for the reader based on an example.

Reviewer 3: I think i will plainly remove the "etc". "@property" is not in the same box, and other decorators seem irrelevant for the matter.

> have access to their function's type parameter and not the enclosing class's.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allow their function's type parameters and not the enclosing class's.
```

Reviewer 3: modified

Subscription should follow the rules specified in :pep:`PEP 696<696#binding-rules>`;
methods should bind type parameters on attribute access.

.. code-block:: python

   class C[T]:
       def method[U](self, x: T, y: U): ...
       @classmethod
       def cls[U](cls, x: T, y: U): ...

   C[int].method[str](0, "")  # OK
   C[int].cls[str](0, "")     # OK
   C.cls[int, str](0, "")     # Invalid: too many type parameters

>    C.cls[str](0, "")          # OK, T is ideally bound to int here though this is open for type checkers to decide

Reviewer: What else should type checkers do? Infer `Literal[0]`?

Reviewer 2: I assume @JelleZijlstra meant "What else **could** type checkers do?" I guess another option would be `Any` if the binding is done as soon as `C.cls` is seen (C not subscripted). Also if `T` had a default it could legally be used in preference over inferring from the call? (I'm fuzzy about this myself.)

Reviewer 3: I think U is matched to str, and once we clear that out, the behaviour of T is not for this PEP to decide, the decision is already made by some typecheckers, so no change:

https://pyrefly.org/sandbox/?project=N4IgZglgNgpgziAXKOBDAdgEwEYHsAeAdAA4CeSIAxlKnHAAQDCA2gCoC6iAOuj-f-QAC1WnAC2MAC4ALXJj4DMMMPWpwAFGoA09fInqsAlPQC0APgP7C1nj1T0AvE0Jr1ABmP0eILSDIAnZShSQklcMSgKAGJ6AAVSQLBg%2BjQsPHxVXHRIAHMAV39USQgswh4YgGUYGHppSUliOEQAemaAoJDcfxzmmHRmzFxKOGbKLNyCopL%2B%2BjAu%2BlQAN1RoVGxYTOyIfMLirPpcYj30ODL0Mhksk0WYfzhpxy8QAGZCAEYAJi4QHmZb-y6cHYPDy6AgYmIXUkMEwJkwEEClGKN0eAHJtugujBUTxMZITIEAI55BEwkwAaxgpBMqEolHgDCcqIA7qh-OgcegQABfXy05EwABi0BgFFSOAIJHI3KAA

I will make a pr to change it to:
- OK, str is bound to U
